In this project, you will practice applying the k-means clustering algorithm on a real dataset.  
You may work with one partner, but it is not required.  Individually turn in a google colab with both partners' names.

 

One common case for clustering is to find subgroups among clients of a business. 
By taking a handful of variables like reliability of payments, purchase history, etc., 
you can find clusters of similar users within all your clients where each cluster represents an average user from that cluster. 
From there, a business can tailor their work from advertisements to loan approvals cluster to cluster with improved results.

 

Before starting: download the MovieLens 20M dataset found here: https://www.kaggle.com/grouplens/movielens-20m-dataset 
(Links to an external site.). It is quite large, so be prepared for that. 
The files you will actually need to do this assignment are movie.csv and rating.csv, the rest are ignorable.

 

Your goal: Find subgroups of movie watchers using the dataset and k-means clustering, and make some conclusions

 

Pick out 2 genres to focus on (for example, adventure and comedy). 
Identify clusters of movie watchers within those two genres. People who really like both types of movies, one but not the other, etc. 
After finishing your clustering, come up with some analysis: imagine that you are a Netflix-type service, 
and want to help your users find movies they like better. 
How would you use your clustering results to serve this purpose, or improve your business in general?
 

Note: This data set is very large and sparse. 
There are over 27000 movies rated by over 138000 users, so not every user has rated every movie. 
It is suggested (and you will likely have to) reduce the number of movies to a smaller number, 
picking movies that have been rated by a larger portion of users, and potentially even reducing the number based on some metrics as well. 
You can do this however you want, but document your thought process and try to keep at least the top 1000 movies, 
but this number is flexible if you can justify why you did it. 

 

Specific requirements:

Pick 2 different genre pairs to compare, cluster, and write some conclusions about.
Use k-means clustering.
Use the knee method (also known as elbow method) to determine your number of clusters.
Document your steps using pandas/numpy/sklearn as you prepare dataframes and use them so it's easy to follow your methodology.
If you're a bit lost on what to do, here's a helpful common example of clustering that might help lead you in the right direction:

 

There are 3 different classes of irises: versicolor, virginica, and setosa, as shown in this image: http://suruchifialoke.com/img/ML/iris.png 
(Links to an external site.). The different classes of irises have different sepal lengths, petal lengths, and petal widths. 
If you know an iris' 3 dimensions, you can figure out which type of iris it is. 

 

One way to classify these irises is by clustering: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/_images/sphx_glr_plot_cluster_iris_002.png 
(Links to an external site.) .

In this graph, every point represents an individual iris, with those petal/sepal 3 dimensions determining where it is plotted in this graph. 
This group has already been clustered, and the 3 different colors represent which cluster a particular point belongs to. 

 

Our movie ratings example is similar. You'll want to have a graph where each point represents a user, and use 2 variables instead of 3: 
how much they like your first genre, and how much they like your second genre. Once you've plotted all your users on that graph, then you cluster. 